proposal: support restoring SQL text from an AST tree (#8533)
pingcap/tidb: docs/design/2018-11-29-ast-to-sql-text.md

The structure of an `ast.Node` as the picture shows(Take `ast.CreateUserStmt` as an example).

![create-user-stmt](./imgs/create-user-stmt.png)

We know there is a `Text()` method of `ast.Node`, 
the parser calls the `SetText()` method during the parsing process, 
then we can call `Text()` to get original input sql. 
But the `Text()` method is incomplete, only the `Text()` of root nodes can work well. 
We should not use it when implementing this proposal.

## Proposal

I recommend adding a `Restore()` method to ast.Node, this is the function defined:

```go
type Node interface {
	// Restore AST to SQL text and append them to `sb`.
	// return error when the AST is invalid.
	Restore(sb *strings.Builder) error
	
	...
}
```

## Rationale

We know the AST is a kind of tree whose child node is correspond to SQL text. 
So we can walk through the AST layer by layer, recursive `Restore()` of each child node and 
splice SQL text according to AST node. 
There is the AST parsed from `SELECT column0 FROM table0 UNION SELECT column1 FROM table1 WHERE a = 1`, 
we can splice SQL text as the picture shows.

![ast tree](./imgs/ast-tree.png)

## Compatibility

> The AST and SQL text are one-to-many relationships, so we can't restore completely equal SQL text, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The AST and SQL text are in a one-to-many relationship, so we can't restore completely equal SQL text. 
```

> we only need to ensure that the ASTs parsed by input SQL and restored SQL are equal.

Author: parsed from

> we only need to ensure that the ASTs parsed by input SQL and restored SQL are equal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We only need to ensure that the ASTs parsed from the input SQL statement and the restored SQL statement are equal.
```

## Implementation

### Stage

> Considering that some ast.Node depend on another ast.Node, we divide sub-tasks into four stages.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Considering that some ast.Node depends on another ast.Node, we divide sub-tasks into four stages.  
```

Detailed list at [pingcap/tidb#8532](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/8532).

### Example

I implemented the `Restore` function of [ast.CreateDatabasesStmt](https://github.com/pingcap/parser/blob/ce4d755a8937ee6bc0e851fafdcd042ab5b1a1c1/ast/ddl.go#L69) 
and [ast.DropDatabaseStmt](https://github.com/pingcap/parser/blob/ce4d755a8937ee6bc0e851fafdcd042ab5b1a1c1/ast/ddl.go#L130) for examples.

```go
// Restore implements Recoverable interface.
func (n *DatabaseOption) Restore(sb *strings.Builder) error {
	switch n.Tp {
	case DatabaseOptionCharset:
		sb.WriteString("CHARACTER SET = ")
		sb.WriteString(n.Value)
	case DatabaseOptionCollate:
		sb.WriteString("COLLATE = ")
		sb.WriteString(n.Value)
	default:
		return errors.Errorf("invalid DatabaseOptionType: %d", n.Tp)
	}
	return nil
}
```

```go
// Restore implements Recoverable interface.
func (n *DropDatabaseStmt) Restore(sb *strings.Builder) error {
	sb.WriteString("DROP DATABASE ")
	if n.IfExists {
		sb.WriteString("IF EXISTS ")
	}
	WriteName(sb, n.Name)
	return nil
}
```

> **There are another examples which is including complete implement and test:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**There are other examples which include complete implementation and test:
```

> # Proposal: Support to restore SQL text from a AST tree.

Reviewer 2: s/a/an

- Author(s):     [Yilin Zhao](https://github.com/leoppro)
- Last updated:  2018-11-29
- Discussion at: https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/8532

## Abstract

This proposal aims to support to restore SQL text from any `ast.Node`.

## Background

> We know there is a `Text()` function of `ast.Node`, 

Reviewer 2: Maybe s/function/method in the Go idiom ?

the parser calls `SetText()` function during the parsing process, then we can call `Text()` to get original input sql. 
But the `Text()` function is incomplete, only the `Text()` of root nodes can work well. 

> Now some features(eg. Database name and table name mapping) need us to make any `ast.Node` could restore to SQL text.

Reviewer 2: need the `ast.Node` to be restorable to SQL text

## Proposal

> We know the AST is a type of tree structure of which child node corresponding to SQL text. 

Reviewer 2: a kind of tree whose child node is correspond to

So we can walk through AST tree layer by layer and splice SQL text according to AST node. 

> There is a AST node parsed from `SELECT column0 FROM table0 UNION SELECT column1 FROM table1 WHERE a = 1`, 

Reviewer 2: s/a AST node/the AST

we can splice SQL text as the picture shows.

![ast tree](./imgs/ast-tree.png)

## Rationale

> See: [Rationale (Chinese)](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1KF4OvObvAzT0YW_KwiMRrsGZQMNVE03RdqShhStM_D4/edit?usp=sharing)

Reviewer 2: Should we translate a few conclusive sentences and put them here? @leoppro

Author: i will do it

Author: i remove it, i think the doc is not helpful to understanding this proposal

> See: [Rationale (Chinese)](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1KF4OvObvAzT0YW_KwiMRrsGZQMNVE03RdqShhStM_D4/edit?usp=sharing)

Reviewer 3: Do not link the Chinese doc here.
Please translate the rationale into English.

Author: i remove it, i think the doc is not helpful to understanding this proposal

## Compatibility

None

## Implementation

### Code

> There is a `Recoverable` interface in [pingcap/parser/ast.go](https://github.com/pingcap/parser/blob/master/ast/ast.go).  

Reviewer 2: The `Recoverable` interface is gone, replaced by a `Restore` method

Reviewer 2: Link a PR is better, the code changes always.

```go
// Recoverable can be restored to sql text
type Recoverable interface {
	// Restore append sql test to `sb`
	Restore(sb *strings.Builder) error
}
```

We need implement it for all `ast.Node()`.

### Example

I implemented the `Restore` function of `ast.CreateDatabasesStmt` and `ast.DropDatabaseStmt` for examples.

```go

> // Restore implements Recoverable interface.

Reviewer 2: Stale, don't forget to update the comment in the following PRs

func (n *CreateDatabaseStmt) Restore(sb *strings.Builder) error {
	sb.WriteString("CREATE DATABASE ")
	if n.IfNotExists {
		sb.WriteString("IF NOT EXISTS ")
	}
	WriteName(sb, n.Name)
	for _, option := range n.Options {
		sb.WriteString(" ")
		err := option.Restore(sb)
		if err != nil {
			return err
		}
	}
	return nil
}
```

```go
// Restore implements Recoverable interface.
func (n *DropDatabaseStmt) Restore(sb *strings.Builder) error {
	sb.WriteString("DROP DATABASE ")
	if n.IfExists {
		sb.WriteString("IF EXISTS ")
	}
	WriteName(sb, n.Name)
	return nil
}
```

### Test

For `ast.StmtNode`:

```go
var sb strings.Builder
err := stmt.Restore(&sb)
c.Assert(err, IsNil)
restoreSQL := sb.String()
comment := Commentf("source %v \nrestore %v", t.src, restoreSQL)
restoreStmt, err := parser.ParseOneStmt(restoreSQL, "", "")
c.Assert(err, IsNil, comment)
ast.CleanNodeText(stmt)
ast.CleanNodeText(restoreStmt)
c.Assert(restoreStmt, DeepEquals, stmt, comment)
```

We believe that a `Restore()` function is correct when it outputs sql text 

> can be parsed successfully and the AST correspond to output sql equals with input sql.

Reviewer 2: From the code, it's better to say:
when the SQL text it outputs can be parsed successfully and the generated AST equals with the original AST.

For other `ast.Node`:

> Some `ast.Node` can't be restored to a complete SQL text, 

Reviewer 2: such as an expression
